transient keyword in java

The transient keyword in Java is a field modifier that indicates a variable should be excluded from the default serialization process. When an object is serialized (converted into a byte stream for storage or transmission), the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) ignores fields marked as transient. 

Purpose and Usage
The primary purpose of the transient keyword is to control which parts of an object's state are persisted. 

. Security: It is commonly used to prevent sensitive data, such as passwords, SSN, or authentication tokens, from being written to a file or transmitted over a network in plain text.

. Performance and Efficiency: You can mark fields that are temporary, can be derived from other serialized fields, or are resource-intensive (like file handles or network sockets) as transient. This reduces the size of the serialized data and improves performance.

. Handling Non-Serializable Fields: If a class implements Serializable but contains a reference to an object that does not implement Serializable (e.g., a Thread or a Logger instance), marking the non-serializable field as transient prevents a NotSerializableException during the serialization process. 

How it Works
When an object is deserialized (recreated from the byte stream), any field marked as transient is not restored from the saved data. Instead, it is initialized to its default value: 

. For reference types (objects), the default value is null.
. For primitive integral types (like int, long), the default value is 0.
. For boolean, the default value is false. 

Example
In this example, the password and sessionToken will not be saved during serialization. 

import java.io.Serializable;

public class User implements Serializable {
    private String username;
    private transient String password; // Will be ignored during serialization
    private transient String sessionToken; // Will be ignored

    public User(String username, String password, String sessionToken) {
        this.username = username;
        this.password = password;
        this.sessionToken = sessionToken;
    }
    // Getters, setters, etc.
}

Key Considerations
. The transient keyword only affects the default Java serialization mechanism (java.io.Serializable).
. It is not applicable to methods or local variables, only instance fields.
. It has no effect on static fields, as static fields are part of the class, not the object's state, 
  and are never serialized by default anyway.
. It can be used with the final keyword, but the behavior can be complex depending on how the final 
  field is initialized (e.g., if it's a constant expression, its value might still be serialized). 